[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I tell you that you really
have to expect your heart
to open and close
like an accordion.
And when it closes,
it will open.
And when it opens, it
will probably close.
Because behind closings
and openings, here we are.
And so instead of
dramatizing your closed heart
or your open heart,
just allow it
to be part of the
process of life,
and be patient with yourself.
Because it is very clear to me
that the shadow is the greatest
teacher of how to
come to the light.
I don't ask for suffering,
but when it comes along,
it certainly turns
out to be grace,
even though I'm begrudging
it all the time it's there.
I mean, you and
I live in a world
where it is hard to keep your
heart fully open because it
hurts so bad, because
there's so much suffering.
But I would tell you you
can't afford to close it.
And so when it
becomes unbearable,
then the choice you have when
something becomes unbearable
is to protect yourself from
it because it's unbearable
or to change who it is that
thinks it's unbearable.
I recommend this latter course.
If you can't bear it, bear it.
You'll find a whole
new interesting part
of your being, somebody
who bears the unbearable.
And until we can
bear the unbearable,
we are really frightened
of suffering, of death,
of all of it, this thing
that we repeat over and over
and over again, hoping
to hear it sometime.
Do what you do
with another being,
but never put them
out of your heart.
You can say no to somebody.
You can oppose them.
You can do what it is
within your role and dharma
you need to do.
But if it involves closing your
heart, you can't afford it.
And to keep your heart really
open with another being really
is soul business.
So every time I forget I'm
dealing with another soul,
and I got caught in
the dance of roles
that we as egos
are in, my heart--
I can feel it close,
and it hurts so bad.
It's like cutting you
off from the life force.
I feel I've deadened into
righteousness, for example.
But I was right.
This person's bad.
But you're paying the price.
Isn't that bizarre?
Their badness is
their predicament.
Your reaction is yours.
And if you've got to close
your heart down to take action,
you're probably standing
in the wrong place.
Because you should be able to do
what you do with another human
being without forgetting that
you love the soul as a soul--
not their actions, but
their essence, their being.